Hyperparam tuning blog post (#2585)
iterative/dvc.org: content/blog/2021-07-13-hyperparam-tuning.md

---
title: Tuning Hyperparameters with Reproducible Experiments
date: 2021-07-13
description: |

>   Since hyperparameter tuning is a common task in ML, it's important to know the values and changes that lead to the model you want to push to production. When you use DVC, you'll be able to track all of the changes you make that give you the optimum model. We'll show examples of grid search and random search.

Reviewer: formatting: please format it to be <= 80 chars

descriptionLong: |
  It's easy to lose track of which changes gave you the best result when you start exploring multiple model architectures. Tracking the changes in your hyperparameter values, along with code and data changes, will help you build a more efficient model by giving you an exact reproduction of the conditions that made the model better. We'll go through an example of grid search and random search using DVC.

picture: 2021-07-13/hyperparameters-july-website.png
pictureComment: Tuning Hyperparameters with Reproducible Experiments
author: milecia_mcgregor

> commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/utilizing-custom-git-references-in-dvc/727

Reviewer: reminder: don't forget to update it

> tags:

Reviewer: do we need to add DVC?

Author: Yep! I added DVC to the tags.

models that emerge.

A few things DVC makes easier to do:

- Letting you make changes without worrying about finding them later
- Onboarding other engineers to a project
- Sharing experiments with other engineers on different machines

For hyperparameter tuning, this means you can play with their values without
losing track of which changes made the best model and also have other engineers
take a look. We'll do an example of this with grid search in DVC first.

## Working with a DVC project

We're going to be working with an existing NLP project. You can
[get the code we're working with in this repo](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started).
It already has DVC set up, but you can check out
[the Get Started docs](https://dvc.org/doc/start) if you want to know how the
DVC pipeline was created.

First make sure you're in a virtual environment with a command similar to this.

```dvc
$ python -m venv .venv
```

After you've cloned the repo, install all of the dependencies with this command.

`pip install -r requirements.txt`

You should be able to open your terminal and run an experiment with the
following command.

> `dvc exp run`

Reviewer: let's use:

```
```dvc
$ dvc exp run
``````

code block

(and in other places, start the line with $ for the syntax highlighter to pick up it

This will trigger the training process to run and it will record the
[average precision](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.average_precision_score.html)
of your model. You can check out the results of your experiment with the
following command.

> `dvc exp show --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split`

Reviewer: same here, let's use code block

│ ├── 35cb92c [exp-4edb8] │  0.53681 │ 0.93608 │ 64              │ 450         │
│ ├── f0f44e8 [exp-dc6c7] │  0.53642 │ 0.93525 │ 128             │ 450         │
```

Now you can see how your precision changed with each hyperparameter value
update. This is a quick implementation of grid search in DVC. You could read the
hyperparameter values from a different file or data source or make this tuning
script as fancy as you like. The main thing you need is the
`dvc exp run --queue --set-param <param>` command to execute when you add new
values.

### Random search

Another commonly used method for tuning hyperparameters is random search. This
takes random values for hyperparameters and builds the model with them. It
usually takes less time than an exhaustive grid search and it can perform better
if run for a similar amount of time as a grid search.

We're going to add a example of random search in a new file called
`random_search.py` simialr to the file we created for grid search. This will add
queued experiments with the randomly selected hyperparameter values. Add the
following code to `random_search.py`.

> ```python

Reviewer: could you please try `python3` here to see if it works better?

Author: It looks like when I try `python3` it removes the python formatting.

training, and keep up with hyperparameter value updates.

Being able to track all of these changes is important so that you can reproduce
your experiments without wondering which changes gave you the best model. You
can go back to any point in your experimenting process to see which changes gave
you the best results.

In this post, we're going to go through an example of hyperparameter tuning with
reproducibility using DVC. You can add this to any existing project you're
working on or start from a fresh project.

## Background on Hyperparameters

Before jumping straight into training and experiments, let's briefly go over
some background on hyperparameters.
[Hyperparameters](/doc/command-reference/params) are the values that define your
model. This includes things like the number of layers in a neural network or the
learning rate for gradient descent.

These parameters are different from model parameters because we can't get them
from training our model. They are used to _create_ the model we train with.
Optimizing these values means running training steps for different kinds of
models to see how accurate the results are. We can get the best model from

> iterating through different hyperparameters values and seeing how they effect

Reviewer 2: Should it be hyperparameter values, instead of both plural?

our accuracy.

That's why we do hyperparameter tuning. There are a couple common methods that
we'll do some code examples with: grid search and random search.

## Tuning with DVC

Let's start by talking about DVC a bit because we'll be using it to add
reproducibility to our tuning process. This is the tool we'll be using to track

> changes in our data, code, and hyperparamters. With DVC, we can add some

Reviewer 2: missing 'e' in hyperparameters.

automation to the tuning process and be able to find and restore any really good
models that emerge.

A few things DVC makes easier to do:

- Letting you make changes without worrying about finding them later
- Onboarding other engineers to a project
- Sharing experiments with other engineers on different machines

> - Tracking experiments and results in your Git repo and compare based on

Reviewer 2: compare -> comparing to keep consistent tense.

Author: I just deleted those last two bullets since they we're quite consistent with the others.

---
title: Tuning Hyperparameters with Reproducible Experiments
date: 2021-07-13
description: |
  It's easy to lose track of which changes gave you the best result when you start exploring multiple model architectures. Tracking the changes in your hyperparameter values, along with code and data changes, will help you build a more efficient model by giving you an exact reproduction of the conditions that made the model better.

descriptionLong: |

>   Since hyperparameter tuning is a common task in ML, it's important to know the values and changes that lead to the model you want to push to production. When you add reproducibility to your project with DVC, you'll be able to track all of the changes you make that give you the optimum model.

Author: I made a few tweaks.

> picture: 2021-07-13/tuning-hyperparams.png

Author: Oh yeah, I'll have to get one made/make one. 😅

> picture: 2021-07-13/tuning-hyperparams.png

Reviewer 2: I'm on it!

> picture: 2021-07-13/tuning-hyperparams.png

Author: Got the image added! Thanks @jendefig!

pictureComment: Tuning Hyperparameters with Reproducible Experiments
author: milecia_mcgregor
commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/utilizing-custom-git-references-in-dvc/727
tags:
  - MLOps
  - Git
  - Experiments
  - Reproducibility
---

## Intro

When you're starting to build a new machine learning model and you're deciding
on the model architecture, there are a number of issues that arise. You have to

> monitor every code change you make, note any differences in your data, and keep

Author: I think I cleared these comments up.

up with hyperparameter value updates.

This means it's important for you to be able to track all of these changes so
you can reproduce your experiments without wondering which changes gave you the
best model. Having reproducibility in your training gives you the ability to go
back to any point in your process to see which changes gave you the best
results.

In this tutorial, we're going to go through an example of hyperparameter tuning
with reproducibility using DVC. You can add this to any existing project you're
working on or start from a fresh project.

## Background on Hyperparameters

Before jumping straight into training and experiments, let's briefly go over
some background on hyperparameters. Hyperparameters are the values that define
your model. This includes things like the number of layers in a neural network
or the learning rate for gradient descent.

> These parameters are different from model parameters because we can't get them

Author: Here's a pretty quick article on the difference. 🙂  https://towardsdatascience.com/model-parameters-and-hyperparameters-in-machine-learning-what-is-the-difference-702d30970f6

> These parameters are different from model parameters because we can't get them

Reviewer 3: Thanks! Still "values that define your model" (definition of hyperparams in line 41) sounds like "model parameters" to me. Or at least both model params and hyperparams define aspects of the model, so that's still a somewhat confusing definition from my PoV. But if you think post readers won't have this confusion then 🆗 

> Tip: from https://machinelearningmastery.com/difference-between-a-parameter-and-a-hyperparameter/ it seems hyperparams are **external** to the model. Maybe that's a helpful terminology distinction (internal vs external).

from training our model. They are used to _create_ the model we train with.
Optimizing these values means running training steps for different kinds of
models to see how accurate the results are. We can get the best model from
iterating through different hyperparameters values and seeing how they effect
our accuracy.

That's why we do hyperparameter tuning. There are a couple common methods that
we'll do some code examples with: grid search and random search.

## Tuning with DVC

Let's start by talking about DVC a bit because we'll be using it to add
reproducibility to our tuning process. This is the tool we'll be using to track
changes in our data, code, and hyperparamters. With DVC, we can add some

> automation to the tuning process and be able to reproduce it all if we find a
> really good model.

Reviewer 3: Feel free to ignore but I found this sentence confusing, is this what you're trying to convey?
```suggestion
automation to the tuning process and be able to find and restore any
really good models that emerge.
```

Author: That sounds better. Thanks!

> A few things DVC makes easier to do include:

Reviewer 3: 💅 
```suggestion
A few things DVC makes easier to do:
```

- Letting you make changes without worrying about finding them later
- Onboarding other engineers to a project
- Sharing experiments with other engineers on different machines
- Tracking experiments and results in your Git repo and compare them from the

>   command line

Reviewer 3: `and compare them`: maybe mention "based on params" or something like that since the post is about that

- Versioning the entire pipeline (including data, code, and commands run)

> For hyperparameter tuning, this means you can play with values and code changes
> without losing track of which changes made the best model and also have other

Reviewer 3: Code seems unrelated in this specific paragraph IMO.
```suggestion
For hyperparameter tuning, this means you can play with their values
without losing track of which changes made the best model and also have other
```

engineers take a look. We'll do an example of this with grid search in DVC
first.

> ## Working with DVC

Reviewer 3: I find this title confusing given the previous one: **Tuning with DVC**. Same thing given the context?

Author: I updated it a bit to hopefully clear that up!

Reviewer 3: Like it 🙂

Reviewer 3: Well... **Tuning with DVC** and then **Working with a DVC project** still sound pretty similar. It's not a big deal 💅 but if it was possible to compress that whole text in between and merge them, I'd consider it. Up to you

Using grid search in hyperparameter tuning means you have an exhaustive list of
hyperparameter values you want to cycle through. Grid search will cover every
combination of those hyperparameter values.

> We're going to show how grid search works with DVC on an NLP project. You can

Reviewer 3: Consider leaving all the grid search intro for the **Start tuning with grid search** subsection.

Reviewer 3: So maybe just jump right into **Run an experiment** (may not even need that H3 depending on the final H2 title above).

It already has DVC set up, but you can check out
[the Get Started docs](https://dvc.org/doc/start) if you want to know how the
DVC pipeline was created.

### Run an experiment

First make sure you're in a virtual environment with a command similar to this.

```dvc
$ python -m venv .venv
```

After you've cloned the repo, install all of the dependencies with this command.

`pip install -r requirements.txt`

You should be able to open your terminal and run an experiment with the
following command.

`dvc exp run`

This will trigger the training process to run and it will record the
[average precision](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.average_precision_score.html)
of your model. You can check out the results of your experiment with the
following command.

`dvc exp show --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split`

_We're adding a few options here to make the table view clearer. We aren't
showing timestamps and we're only looking at two hyperparameter values. You can
run `dvc exp show` without the options to see the entire table._

This will produce a table similar to this.

> ```

Reviewer 3: There may be special highlighting for these in the future so I'd use
````suggestion
```dvc
````
if possible

later. That way we can cycle through multiple hyperparameters quickly instead of
manually updating a config file with new hyperparameter values for each
experiment run. The command syntax for creating queues looks like this:

```dvc
dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.min_split=8
```

In the example queue above, we're updating the `train.min_split` value that's
inside of the `params.yaml` file. This file holds all of the hyperparameter
values and is where DVC looks to determine if any values have changed. With the
command above, we're automatically updating that value in the `params.yaml`
using a queued experiment.

Now we can make the script. You can add a new file to the `src` directory called
`tuning.py`. Inside of the file, add the following code.

```python
import itertools
import subprocess
import random

# Automated grid search experiments
n_est_values = [250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500]
min_split_values = [8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256]

# Iterate over all combinations of hyperparameter values.
for n_est, min_split in itertools.product(n_est_values, min_split_values):
    # Execute "dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.n_est=<n_est> -S train.min_split=<min_split>".

>     subprocess.run(["dvc", "exp", "run", "--queue", "--set-param", f"train.n_est={n_est}", "--set-param", f"train.min_split={min_split}"])

Reviewer 4: Consider breaking these lines up so they are more readable.

Reviewer 3: Yeah. There's several horizontal scroll bars that you could try to avoid if you want e.g.:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/124843526-b9f63000-df57-11eb-861a-511e3ea03a2a.png)
> See https://dvc-org-hyperparam-tuni-jtxtkd.herokuapp.com/blog/hyperparam-tuning

```

This is a simple grid search. We have two hyperparameters we want to tune:
`n_est` and `min_split`. So we have arrays with a few values in them to mimic
the exhaustive search a grid search can handle. Then we loop through the values
and create queued experiments for them using `subprocess`.

You can run this script now and generate your queue with this command.

`python src/tuning.py`

You'll see some outputs in the terminal telling you that your experiments have
been queued. Then you can run them all with the following command.

```dvc
dvc exp run --run-all
```

This will run every experiment that has been queued. Once all of those have run,
take a look at your metrics for each experiment.

```dvc
dvc exp show --include-params=train.min_split,train.n_est --no-timestamp
```

Your table should look similar to this when you run the command above. We've
included the `--include-params` and `--no-timestamp` options to give us a table
that's easier to read.

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```dvc
````

│ ├── 367d0fc [exp-f9edb] │  0.55135 │ 0.93455 │ 16              │ 400         │
│ ├── 45a2ee6 [exp-24f26] │  0.54877 │ 0.93467 │ 32              │ 400         │
│ ├── 967a9c2 [exp-67a0c] │  0.53505 │ 0.93703 │ 64              │ 400         │
│ ├── bccfed8 [exp-83d3e] │  0.52921 │ 0.93681 │ 128             │ 400         │
│ ├── a3e4182 [exp-9ecac] │  0.52573 │ 0.93606 │ 256             │ 400         │
│ ├── 6b8424c [exp-42ba9] │  0.55812 │ 0.93587 │ 8               │ 450         │
│ ├── d075700 [exp-d1a08] │  0.55283 │ 0.93396 │ 16              │ 450         │
│ ├── ab1e718 [exp-3ad29] │  0.54889 │ 0.93361 │ 32              │ 450         │
│ ├── 35cb92c [exp-4edb8] │  0.53681 │ 0.93608 │ 64              │ 450         │
│ ├── f0f44e8 [exp-dc6c7] │  0.53642 │ 0.93525 │ 128             │ 450         │
```

Now you can see how your precision changed with each hyperparameter value
update. This is a quick implementation of grid search in DVC. You could read the
hyperparameter values from a different file or data source or make this tuning
script as fancy as you like. The main thing you need is the
`dvc exp run --queue --set-param <param>` command to execute when you add new
values.

> ### Random Search

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Random search
```

Another commonly used method for tuning hyperparameters is random search. This
takes random values for hyperparameters and builds the model with them. It
usually takes less time than an exhaustive grid search and it can perform better
if run for a similar amount of time as a grid search.

We're going to add an example of random search to the `tuning.py` file we
created for grid search. This will add queued experiments with the randomly
selected hyperparameter values. Add the following code to `tuning.py` below the

> grid search implementation.

Reviewer 4: This seems like it's going to run both the exhaustive grid search and the random search, right? Maybe it's best to put this into a separate script, like `grid_search.py` and `random_search.py`, in which case you probably need to have the correct imports and all in each code block here.

Author: That makes sense. I split that one file into these two separate ones and updated the text around them.

```python
# Automated random search experiments
num_exps = 10

for _ in range(num_exps):

>     random.seed(0)

Reviewer 4: Probably better to put this above the for loop. No need to be calling it repeatedly.

    params = {
        "rand_n_est_value": random.randint(250, 500),

>         "rand_min_split_value": random.choice([8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192])

Reviewer 4: Sorry, can you revert to the old values here? It's too long now, and the results for the new values aren't good.

    }
    subprocess.run(["dvc", "exp", "run", "--queue", "--set-param",
                   f"train.n_est={params['rand_n_est_value']}", "--set-param", f"train.min_split={params['rand_min_split_value']}"])
```

> This random search could be far more complex with Bayesian optimization to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This search could be far more complex with Bayesian optimization to
```

It wouldn't be a random search anymore if using Bayesian optimization.

handle the hyperparameter value selections, but we're keeping it super simple by
choosing random numbers to focus on reproducibility. This will generate ten
experiments with random values for each hyperparameter.

You can run these new experiments with `dvc exp run --run-all` and then take a
look at the results with
`dvc exp show --include-params=train.min_split,train.n_est --no-timestamp`. Your
table should look something like this.

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```dvc
````

from training our model. They are used to _create_ the model we train with.
Optimizing these values means running training steps for different kinds of
models to see how accurate the results are. We can get the best model from
iterating through different hyperparameters values and seeing how they effect
our accuracy.

That's why we do hyperparameter tuning. There are a couple common methods that
we'll do some code examples with: grid search and random search.

## Tuning with DVC

Let's start by talking about DVC a bit because we'll be using it to add
reproducibility to our tuning process. This is the tool we'll be using to track
changes in our data, code, and hyperparamters. With DVC, we can add some
automation to the tuning process and be able to find and restore any really good
models that emerge.

A few things DVC makes easier to do:

- Letting you make changes without worrying about finding them later
- Onboarding other engineers to a project
- Sharing experiments with other engineers on different machines
- Tracking experiments and results in your Git repo and compare based on
  parameters from the command line

> - Versioning the entire pipeline (including data, code, and commands run)

Reviewer 4: Up to you and other reviewers whether to keep these last two bullets. They still seem a little long and incosistent with the others, but I think it's fine either way.

Author: I decided to just take them out.

│ ├── a3e4182 [exp-9ecac] │  0.52573 │ 0.93606 │ 256             │ 400         │
│ ├── 6b8424c [exp-42ba9] │  0.55812 │ 0.93587 │ 8               │ 450         │
│ ├── d075700 [exp-d1a08] │  0.55283 │ 0.93396 │ 16              │ 450         │
│ ├── ab1e718 [exp-3ad29] │  0.54889 │ 0.93361 │ 32              │ 450         │
│ ├── 35cb92c [exp-4edb8] │  0.53681 │ 0.93608 │ 64              │ 450         │
│ ├── f0f44e8 [exp-dc6c7] │  0.53642 │ 0.93525 │ 128             │ 450         │
```

Now you can see how your precision changed with each hyperparameter value
update. This is a quick implementation of grid search in DVC. You could read the
hyperparameter values from a different file or data source or make this tuning
script as fancy as you like. The main thing you need is the
`dvc exp run --queue --set-param <param>` command to execute when you add new
values.

### Random search

Another commonly used method for tuning hyperparameters is random search. This
takes random values for hyperparameters and builds the model with them. It
usually takes less time than an exhaustive grid search and it can perform better
if run for a similar amount of time as a grid search.

> We're going to add a example of random search in a new file called
> `random_search.py` simialr to the file we created for grid search. This will add

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We're going to add an example of random search in a new file called
`random_search.py` similar to the file we created for grid search. This will add
```

queued experiments with the randomly selected hyperparameter values. Add the
following code to `random_search.py`.

```python
import subprocess
import random

# Automated random search experiments
num_exps = 10
random.seed(0)

for _ in range(num_exps):

>     params = {
>         "rand_n_est_value": random.randint(250, 500),
>         "rand_min_split_value": random.choice([8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256])
>     }
>     subprocess.run(["dvc", "exp", "run", "--queue",
>                     "--set-params", f"train.n_est={params['rand_n_est_value']}",
>                     "--set-params", f"train.min_split={params['rand_min_split_value']}"])

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    rand_n_est_values =  random.randint(250, 500),
    rand_min_split_values = random.choice([8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256])
    subprocess.run(["dvc", "exp", "run", "--queue",
                    "--set-params", f"train.n_est={rand_n_est_values}",
                    "--set-params", f"train.min_split={rand_min_split_values}"])
```

Just applying the same changes made to the grid search example to make it a little less verbose.

```

This search could be far more complex with Bayesian optimization to handle the
hyperparameter value selections, but we're keeping it super simple by choosing
random numbers to focus on reproducibility. This will generate ten experiments
with random values for each hyperparameter.

You can run these new experiments with `dvc exp run --run-all` and then take a
look at the results with
`dvc exp show --include-params=train.min_split,train.n_est --no-timestamp`. Your
table should look something like this.

> ```dvc

Reviewer 4: Can you update the table with the new results now that you aren't using `train.min_split = 8192`?

---
title: Tuning Hyperparameters with Reproducible Experiments
date: 2021-07-13
description: |
  Using DVC, you'll be able to track the changes that give you an ideal model.

descriptionLong: |

>   It's easy to lose track of which changes gave you the best result when you start exploring multiple model architectures. Tracking the changes in your hyperparameter values, along wzith code and data changes, will help you build a more efficient model by giving you an exact reproduction of the conditions that made the model better. We'll go through an example of grid search and random search using DVC.

Reviewer: formatting - keep it < 80 please

changes in our data, code, and hyperparameters. With DVC, we can add some
automation to the tuning process and be able to find and restore any really good
models that emerge.

A few things DVC makes easier to do:

- Letting you make changes without worrying about finding them later
- Onboarding other engineers to a project
- Sharing experiments with other engineers on different machines

For hyperparameter tuning, this means you can play with their values without
losing track of which changes made the best model and also have other engineers
take a look. We'll do an example of this with grid search in DVC first.

## Working with a DVC project

We're going to be working with an existing NLP project. You can
[get the code we're working with in this repo](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started).
It already has DVC set up, but you can check out
[the Get Started docs](https://dvc.org/doc/start) if you want to know how the
DVC pipeline was created.

First make sure you're in a virtual environment with a command similar to this.

```dvc
$ python -m venv .venv
```

After you've cloned the repo, install all of the dependencies with this command.

> ```

Reviewer: make it a `dvc` block (like the one above) and start with `$`

using a queued experiment.

Now we can make the script. You can add a new file to the `src` directory called
`grid_search.py`. Inside of the file, add the following code.

```python
import itertools
import subprocess

# Automated grid search experiments
n_est_values = [250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500]
min_split_values = [8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256]

# Iterate over all combinations of hyperparameter values.
for n_est, min_split in itertools.product(n_est_values, min_split_values):
    # Execute "dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.n_est=<n_est> --set-param train.min_split=<min_split>".
    subprocess.run(["dvc", "exp", "run", "--queue",
                    "--set-param", f"train.n_est={n_est}",
                    "--set-param", f"train.min_split={min_split}"])
```

This is a simple grid search. We have two hyperparameters we want to tune:
`n_est` and `min_split`. So we have arrays with a few values in them to mimic
the exhaustive search a grid search can handle. Then we loop through the values
and create queued experiments for them using `subprocess`.

You can run this script now and generate your queue with this command.

```python

> $ python src/grid_search.py

Reviewer: something wrong with this symbol ^^?

Author: It was because the codeblock was using `python`. I switched it to use `dvc`.

Reviewer: 👍
